become philosophers to employ
their thoughts (contrary to what some hold) about the final causes of
things; and I confess I see no reason why pointing out the various ends
to which natural things are adapted, and for which they were originally
with unspeakable wisdom contrived, should not be thought one good way of
accounting for them, and altogether worthy a philosopher. Thirdly, from
what has been premised no reason can be drawn why the history of nature
should not still be studied, and observations and experiments made,
which, that they are of use to mankind, and enable us to draw any general
conclusions, is not the result of any immutable habitudes or relations
between things themselves, but only of God's goodness and kindness to men
in the administration of the world. See sect. 30 and 31 Fourthly, by a
diligent observation of the phenomena within our view, we may discover
the general laws of nature, and from them deduce the other phenomena; I
do not say demonstrate, for all deductions of that kind depend on a
supposition that the Author of nature always operates uniformly, and in a
constant observance of those rules we take for principles: which we
cannot evidently know.

108. THREE ANALOGIES.--Those men who frame general rules from the
phenomena and afterwards derive the phenomena from those rules, seem
to consider signs rather than causes. A man may well understand
natural signs without knowing their analogy, or being able to say
by what rule a thing is so or so. And, as it is very possible to
write improperly, through too strict an observance of general grammar
rules; so, in arguing from general laws of nature, it is not impossible
we may extend the analogy too far, and by that means run into mistakes.

109. As in reading other books a wise man will choose to fix his thoughts
on the sense and apply it to use, rather than lay them out in grammatical
remarks on the language; so, in perusing the volume of nature, it seems
beneath the dignity of the mind to affect an exactness in reducing each
particular phenomenon to general rules, or showing how it follows from
them. We should propose to ourselves nobler views, namely, to recreate
and exalt the mind with a prospect of the beauty, order. extent, and
variety of natural things: hence, by proper inferences, to enlarge our
notions of the grandeur, wisdom, and beneficence of the Creator; and
lastly, to make the several parts of the creation, so far as in us lies,
subservient to the ends they were designed for, God's glory, and the
sustentation and comfort of ourselves and fellow-creatures.

110. The best key for the aforesaid analogy or natural Science will be
easily acknowledged to be a certain celebrated Treatise of Mechanics. In
the entrance of which justly admired treatise, Time, Space, and Motion
are distinguished into absolute and relative, true and apparent,
mathematical and vulgar; which distinction, as it is at large explained
by the author, does suppose these quantities to have an existence without
the mind; and that they are ordinarily conceived with relation to
sensible things, to which nevertheless in their own nature they bear no
relation at all.

111. As for Time, as it is there taken in an absolute or abstracted
sense, for the duration or perseverance of the existence of things, I
have nothing more to add concerning it after what has been already said
on that subject. Sect. 97 and 98. For the rest, this celebrated author
holds there is an absolute Space, which, being unperceivable to sense,
remains in itself similar and immovable; and relative space to be the
measure thereof, which, being movable and defined by its situation in
respect of sensible bodies, is vulgarly taken for immovable space. Place
he defines to be that part of space which is occupied by any body; and
according as the space is absolute or relative so also is the place.
Absolute Motion is said to be the translation of a body from absolute
place to absolute place, as relative motion is from one relative place to
another. And, because the parts of absolute space do not fall under our
senses, instead of them we are obliged to use their sensible measures,
and so define both place and motion with respect to bodies which we
regard as immovable. But, it is said in philosophical matters we must
abstract from our senses, since it may be that none of those bodies which
seem to be quiescent are truly so, and the same thing which is moved
relatively may be really at rest; as likewise one and the same body may
be in relative rest and motion, or even moved with contrary relative
motions at the same time, according as its place is variously defined.
All which ambiguity is to be found in the apparent motions, but not at
all in the true or absolute, which should therefore be alone regarded in
philosophy. And the true as we are told are distinguished from apparent
or relative motions by the following properties.--First, in true or
absolute motion all parts which preserve the same position with respect
of the whole, partake of the motions of the whole. Secondly, the place
being moved, that which is placed therein is also moved; so that a body
moving in a place which is in motion doth participate the motion of its
place. Thirdly, true motion is never generated or changed otherwise than
by force impressed on the body itself. Fourthly, true motion is always
changed by force impressed on the body moved. Fifthly, in circular motion
barely relative there is no centrifugal force, which, nevertheless, in
that which is true or absolute, is proportional to the quantity of
motion.

112. MOTION, WHETHER REAL OR APPARENT, RELATIVE.--But, notwithstanding
what has been said, I must confess it does not appear to me that
there can be any motion other than relative; so that to conceive
motion there must be at least conceived two bodies, whereof the
distance or position in regard to each other is varied. Hence, if there
was one only body in being it could not possibly be moved. This seems
evident, in that the idea I have of motion doth necessarily include
relation.

113. APPARENT MOTION DENIED.--But, though in every motion it be
necessary to conceive more bodies than one, yet it may be that one
only is moved, namely, that on which the force causing the change
in the distance or situation of the bodies, is impressed. For, however
some may define relative motion, so as to term that body moved
which changes its distance from some other body, whether the force
or action causing that change were impressed on it or no, yet as
relative motion is that which is perceived by sense, and regarded in
the ordinary affairs of life, it should seem that every man of common
sense knows what it is as well as the best philosopher. Now, I ask any
one whether, in his sense of motion as he walks along the streets, the
stones he passes over may be said to move, because they change distance
with