internal sense,
remains undemonstrated, nay, even indemonstrable. Its permanence in
life is evident, per se, inasmuch as the thinking being (as man) is to
itself, at the same time, an object of the external senses. But this
does not authorize the rational psychologist to affirm, from mere
conceptions, its permanence beyond life.[46]

 [45] Clearness is not, as logicians maintain, the consciousness of a
 representation. For a certain degree of consciousness, which may not,
 however, be sufficient for recollection, is to be met with in many dim
 representations. For without any consciousness at all, we should not
 be able to recognize any difference in the obscure representations we
 connect; as we really can do with many conceptions, such as those of
 right and justice, and those of the musician, who strikes at once
 several notes in improvising a piece of music. But a representation is
 clear, in which our consciousness is sufficient for the consciousness
 of the difference of this representation from others. If we are only
 conscious that there is a difference, but are not conscious of the
 difference—that is, what the difference is—the representation must be
 termed obscure. There is, consequently, an infinite series of degrees
 of consciousness down to its entire disappearance.

 [46] There are some who think they have done enough to establish a new
 possibility in the mode of the existence of souls, when they have
 shown that there is no contradiction in their hypotheses on this
 subject. Such are those who affirm the possibility of thought—of which
 they have no other knowledge than what they derive from its use in
 connecting empirical intuitions presented in this our human life—after
 this life has ceased. But it is very easy to embarrass them by the
 introduction of counter-possibilities, which rest upon quite as good a
 foundation. Such, for example, is the possibility of the division of a
 simple substance into several substances; and conversely, of the
 coalition of several into one simple substance. For, although
 divisibility presupposes composition, it does not necessarily require
 a composition of substances, but only of the degrees (of the several
 faculties) of one and the same substance. Now we can cogitate all the
 powers and faculties of the soul—even that of consciousness—as
 diminished by one half, the substance still remaining. In the same way
 we can represent to ourselves without contradiction, this obliterated
 half as preserved, not in the soul, but without it; and we can believe
 that, as in this case every thing that is real in the soul, and has a
 degree—consequently its entire existence—has been halved, a particular
 substance would arise out of the soul. For the multiplicity, which has
 been divided, formerly existed, but not as a multiplicity of
 substances, but of every reality as the quantum of existence in it;
 and the unity of substance was merely a mode of existence, which by
 this division alone has been transformed into a plurality of
 subsistence. In the same manner several simple substances might
 coalesce into one, without anything being lost except the plurality of
 subsistence, inasmuch as the one substance would contain the degree of
 reality of all the former substances. Perhaps, indeed, the simple
 substances, which appear under the form of matter, might (not indeed
 by a mechanical or chemical influence upon each other, but by an
 unknown influence, of which the former would be but the phenomenal
 appearance), by means of such a dynamical division of the
 parent-souls, as intensive quantities, produce other souls, while the
 former repaired the loss thus sustained with new matter of the same
 sort. I am far from allowing any value to such chimeras; and the
 principles of our analytic have clearly proved that no other than an
 empirical use of the categories—that of substance, for example—is
 possible. But if the rationalist is bold enough to construct, on the
 mere authority of the faculty of thought—without any intuition,
 whereby an object is given—a self-subsistent being, merely because the
 unity of apperception in thought cannot allow him to believe it a
 composite being, instead of declaring, as he ought to do, that he is
 unable to explain the possibility of a thinking nature; what ought to
 hinder the materialist, with as complete an independence of
 experience, to employ the principle of the rationalist in a directly
 opposite manner—still preserving the formal unity required by his
 opponent?

If, now, we take the above propositions—as they must be accepted as
valid for all thinking beings in the system of rational psychology—in
synthetical connection, and proceed, from the category of relation,
with the proposition: “All thinking beings are, as such, substances,”
backwards through the series, till the circle is completed; we come at
last to their existence, of which, in this system of rational
psychology, substances are held to be conscious, independently of
external things; nay, it is asserted that, in relation to the
permanence which is a necessary characteristic of substance, they can
of themselves determine external things. It follows that idealism—at
least problematical idealism, is perfectly unavoidable in this
rationalistic system. And, if the existence of outward things is not
held to be requisite to the determination of the existence of a
substance in time, the existence of these outward things at all, is a
gratuitous assumption which remains without the possibility of a proof.

But if we proceed analytically—the “I think” as a proposition
containing in itself an existence as given, consequently modality being
the principle—and dissect this proposition, in order to ascertain its
content, and discover whether and how this Ego determines its existence
in time and space without the aid of anything external; the
propositions of rationalistic psychology would not begin with the
conception of a thinking being, but with a reality, and the properties
of a thinking being in general would be deduced from the mode in which
this reality is cogitated, after everything empirical had been
abstracted; as is shown in the following table:

                        1
                      I think,

            2                             3
        as Subject,              as simple Subject,

                        4
               as identical Subject,
           in every state of my thought.

Now, inasmuch as it is not determined in this second proposition,
whether I can exist and be cogitated only as subject, and not also as a
predicate of another being, the conception of a subject is here taken
in a merely logical sense; and it remains undetermined, whether
substance is to be cogitated under the conception or not. But in the
third proposition, the absolute unity of apperception—the simple Ego in
the representation to which all connection and separation, which
constitute thought, relate, is of itself important; even although it
presents us with no information about the constitution or subsistence
of the subject. Apperception is something real, and the simplicity of
its nature is given in the very fact of its possibility. Now in space
there is nothing real that is at the same time simple; for points,
which are the only simple things in space, are merely limits, but not
constituent parts of space. From this follows the impossibility of a
definition on the basis of materialism of the constitution of my Ego as
a merely thinking subject. But, because my existence is considered in
the first proposition as given, for it does