ask him
what he was that moment thinking of. If he himself be conscious of
nothing he then thought on, he must be a notable diviner of thoughts
that can assure him that he was thinking. May he not, with more reason,
assure him he was not asleep? This is something beyond philosophy; and
it cannot be less than revelation, that discovers to another thoughts
in my mind, when I can find none there myself. And they must needs have
a penetrating sight who can certainly see that I think, when I cannot
perceive it myself, and when I declare that I do not; and yet can see
that dogs or elephants do not think, when they give all the
demonstration of it imaginable, except only telling us that they do so.
This some may suspect to be a step beyond the Rosicrucians; it seeming
easier to make one’s self invisible to others, than to make another’s
thoughts visible to me, which are not visible to himself. But it is but
defining the soul to be “a substance that always thinks,” and the
business is done. If such definition be of any authority, I know not
what it can serve for but to make many men suspect that they have no
souls at all; since they find a good part of their lives pass away
without thinking. For no definitions that I know, no suppositions of
any sect, are of force enough to destroy constant experience; and
perhaps it is the affectation of knowing beyond what we perceive, that
makes so much useless dispute and noise in the world.

20. No ideas but from Sensation and Reflection, evident, if we observe
Children.

I see no reason, therefore, to believe that the soul thinks before the
senses have furnished it with ideas to think on; and as those are
increased and retained, so it comes, by exercise, to improve its
faculty of thinking in the several parts of it; as well as, afterwards,
by compounding those ideas, and reflecting on its own operations, it
increases its stock, as well as facility in remembering, imagining,
reasoning, and other modes of thinking.

21. State of a child in the mother’s womb.

He that will suffer himself to be informed by observation and
experience, and not make his own hypothesis the rule of nature, will
find few signs of a soul accustomed to much thinking in a new-born
child, and much fewer of any reasoning at all. And yet it is hard to
imagine that the rational soul should think so much, and not reason at
all. And he that will consider that infants newly come into the world
spend the greatest part of their time in sleep, and are seldom awake
but when either hunger calls for the teat, or some pain (the most
importunate of all sensations), or some other violent impression on the
body, forces the mind to perceive and attend to it;—he, I say, who
considers this, will perhaps find reason to imagine that a Fœtus in the
mother’s womb differs not much from the state of a vegetable, but
passes the greatest part of its time without perception or thought;
doing very little but sleep in a place where it needs not seek for
food, and is surrounded with liquor, always equally soft, and near of
the same temper; where the eyes have no light, and the ears so shut up
are not very susceptible of sounds; and where there is little or no
variety, or change of objects, to move the senses.

22. The mind thinks in proportion to the matter it gets from experience
to think about.

Follow a child from its birth, and observe the alterations that time
makes, and you shall find, as the mind by the senses comes more and
more to be furnished with ideas, it comes to be more and more awake;
thinks more, the more it has matter to think on. After some time it
begins to know the objects which, being most familiar with it, have
made lasting impressions. Thus it comes by degrees to know the persons
it daily converses with, and distinguishes them from strangers; which
are instances and effects of its coming to retain and distinguish the
ideas the senses convey to it. And so we may observe how the mind, BY
DEGREES, improves in these; and ADVANCES to the exercise of those other
faculties of enlarging, compounding, and abstracting its ideas, and of
reasoning about them, and reflecting upon all these; of which I shall
have occasion to speak more hereafter.

23. A man begins to have ideas when he first has sensation. What
sensation is.

If it shall be demanded then, WHEN a man BEGINS to have any ideas, I
think the true answer is,—WHEN HE FIRST HAS ANY SENSATION. For, since
there appear not to be any ideas in the mind before the senses have
conveyed any in, I conceive that ideas in the understanding are coeval
with SENSATION; WHICH IS SUCH AN IMPRESSION OR MOTION MADE IN SOME PART
OF THE BODY, AS MAKES IT BE TAKEN NOTICE OF IN THE UNDERSTANDING.

24. The Original of all our Knowledge.

The impressions then that are made on our sense by outward objects that
are extrinsical to the mind; and its own operations about these
impressions, reflected on by itself, as proper objects to be
contemplated by it, are, I conceive, the original of all knowledge.
Thus the first capacity of human intellect is,—that the mind is fitted
to receive the impressions made on it; either through the senses by
outward objects, or by its own operations when it reflects on them.
This is the first step a man makes towards the discovery of anything,
and the groundwork whereon to build all those notions which ever he
shall have naturally in this world. All those sublime thoughts which
tower above the clouds, and reach as high as heaven itself, take their
rise and footing here: in all that great extent wherein the mind
wanders, in those remote speculations it may seem to be elevated with,
it stirs not one jot beyond those ideas which SENSE or REFLECTION have
offered for its contemplation.

25. In the Reception of simple Ideas, the Understanding is for the most
part passive.

In this part the understanding is merely passive; and whether or no it
will have these beginnings, and as it were materials of knowledge, is
not in its own power. For the objects of our senses do, many of them,
obtrude their particular ideas upon our minds whether we will or not;
and the operations of our minds will not let us be without, at least,
some obscure notions of them. No man can be wholly ignorant of what he
does when he thinks. These simple ideas, when offered to the mind, the
understanding can no more refuse to have, nor alter when they are
imprinted, nor blot them out and make new ones itself, than a mirror
can refuse, alter, or obliterate the images or ideas which the objects
set before it do therein produce. As the bodies that surround us do
diversely affect our organs, the