thinking
in a Soul.

If any one says he knows not what it is thinks in him, he means he
knows not what the substance is of that thinking thing: No more, say I,
knows he what the substance is of that solid thing. Further, if he says
he knows not how he thinks, I answer, Neither knows he how he is
extended, how the solid parts of body are united or cohere together to
make extension. For though the pressure of the particles of air may
account for the cohesion of several parts of matter that are grosser
than the particles of air, and have pores less than the corpuscles of
air, yet the weight or pressure of the air will not explain, nor can be
a cause of the coherence of the particles of air themselves. And if the
pressure of the aether, or any subtiler matter than the air, may unite,
and hold fast together, the parts of a particle of air, as well as
other bodies, yet it cannot make bonds for ITSELF, and hold together
the parts that make up every the least corpuscle of that MATERIA
SUBTILIS. So that that hypothesis, how ingeniously soever explained, by
showing that the parts of sensible bodies are held together by the
pressure of other external insensible bodies, reaches not the parts of
the aether itself; and by how much the more evident it proves, that the
parts of other bodies are held together by the external pressure of the
aether, and can have no other conceivable cause of their cohesion and
union, by so much the more it leaves us in the dark concerning the
cohesion of the parts of the corpuscles of the aether itself: which we
can neither conceive without parts, they being bodies, and divisible,
nor yet how their parts cohere, they wanting that cause of cohesion
which is given of the cohesion of the parts of all other bodies.

24. Not explained by an ambient fluid.

But, in truth, the pressure of any ambient fluid, how great soever, can
be no intelligible cause of the cohesion of the solid parts of matter.
For, though such a pressure may hinder the avulsion of two polished
superficies, one from another, in a line perpendicular to them, as in
the experiment of two polished marbles; yet it can never in the least
hinder the separation by a motion, in a line parallel to those
surfaces. Because the ambient fluid, having a full liberty to succeed
in each point of space, deserted by a lateral motion, resists such a
motion of bodies, so joined, no more than it would resist the motion of
that body were it on all sides environed by that fluid, and touched no
other body; and therefore, if there were no other cause of cohesion,
all parts of bodies must be easily separable by such a lateral sliding
motion. For if the pressure of the aether be the adequate cause of
cohesion, wherever that cause operates not, there can be no cohesion.
And since it cannot operate against a lateral separation, (as has been
shown,) therefore in every imaginary plane, intersecting any mass of
matter, there could be no more cohesion than of two polished surfaces,
which will always, notwithstanding any imaginable pressure of a fluid,
easily slide one from another. So that perhaps, how clear an idea
soever we think we have of the extension of body, which is nothing but
the cohesion of solid parts, he that shall well consider it in his
mind, may have reason to conclude, That it is as easy for him to have a
clear idea how the soul thinks as how body is extended. For, since body
is no further, nor otherwise, extended, than by the union and cohesion
of its solid parts, we shall very ill comprehend the extension of body,
without understanding wherein consists the union and cohesion of its
parts; which seems to me as incomprehensible as the manner of thinking,
and how it is performed.

We can as little understand how the parts cohere in extension as how
our spirits perceive or move.

25. I allow it is usual for most people to wonder how any one should
find a difficulty in what they think they every day observe. Do we not
see (will they be ready to say) the parts of bodies stick firmly
together? Is there anything more common? And what doubt can there be
made of it? And the like, I say, concerning thinking and voluntary
motion. Do we not every moment experiment it in ourselves, and
therefore can it be doubted? The matter of fact is clear, I confess;
but when we would a little nearer look into it, both in the one and the
other; and can as little understand how the parts of body cohere, as
how we ourselves perceive or move. I would have any one intelligibly
explain to me how the parts of gold, or brass, (that but now in fusion
were as loose from one another as the particles of water, or the sands
of an hour-glass,) come in a few moments to be so united, and adhere so
strongly one to another, that the utmost force of men’s arms cannot
separate them? A considering man will, I suppose, be here at a loss to
satisfy his own, or another man’s understanding.

26. The cause of coherence of atoms in extended substances
incomprehensible.

The little bodies that compose that fluid we call water are so
extremely small, that I have never heard of any one who, by a
microscope, (and yet I have heard of some that have magnified to ten
thousand; nay, to much above a hundred thousand times,) pretended to
perceive their distinct bulk, figure, or motion; and the particles of
water are also so perfectly loose one from another, that the least
force sensibly separates them. Nay, if we consider their perpetual
motion, we must allow them to have no cohesion one with another; and
yet let but a sharp cold come, and they unite, they consolidate; these
little atoms cohere, and are not, without great force, separable. He
that could find the bonds that tie these heaps of loose little bodies
together so firmly; he that could make known the cement that makes them
stick so fast one to another, would discover a great and yet unknown
secret: and yet when that was done, would he be far enough from making
the extension of body (which is the cohesion of its solid parts)
intelligible, till he could show wherein consisted the union, or
consolidation of the parts of those bonds or of that cement, or of the
least particle of matter that exists. Whereby it appears that this
primary and supposed obvious quality of body will be found, when
examined, to be as incomprehensible as anything belonging to our minds,
and a solid extended substance as hard to be conceived as a thinking
immaterial one, whatever difficulties some would raise against it.

27. The supposed pressure [*dropped word] explain cohesion is
unintelligible.

For, to extend our thoughts a little further, the pressure which is
brought to explain the