still there remains as much to be added, as if none were
taken out. And this ENDLESS ADDITION or ADDIBILITY (if any one like the
word better) of numbers, so apparent to the mind, is that, I think,
which gives us the clearest and most distinct idea of infinity: of
which more in the following chapter.

CHAPTER XVII.
OF INFINITY.

1. Infinity, in its original Intention, attributed to Space, Duration,
and Number.

He that would know what kind of idea it is to which we give the name of
INFINITY, cannot do it better than by considering to what infinity is
by the mind more immediately attributed; and then how the mind comes to
frame it.

FINITE and INFINITE seem to me to be looked upon by the mind as the
MODES OF QUANTITY, and to be attributed primarily in their first
designation only to those things which have parts, and are capable of
increase or diminution by the addition or subtraction of any the least
part: and such are the ideas of space, duration, and number, which we
have considered in the foregoing chapters. It is true, that we cannot
but be assured, that the great God, of whom and from whom are all
things, is incomprehensibly infinite: but yet, when we apply to that
first and supreme Being our idea of infinite, in our weak and narrow
thoughts, we do it primarily in respect to his duration and ubiquity;
and, I think, more figuratively to his power, wisdom, and goodness, and
other attributes which are properly inexhaustible and incomprehensible,
&c. For, when we call THEM infinite, we have no other idea of this
infinity but what carries with it some reflection on, and imitation of,
that number or extent of the acts or objects of God’s power, wisdom,
and goodness, which can never be supposed so great, or so many, which
these attributes will not always surmount and exceed, let us multiply
them in our thoughts as far as we can, with all the infinity of endless
number. I do not pretend to say how these attributes are in God, who is
infinitely beyond the reach of our narrow capacities: they do, without
doubt, contain in them all possible perfection: but this, I say, is our
way of conceiving them, and these our ideas of their infinity.

2. The Idea of Finite easily got.

Finite then, and infinite, being by the mind looked on as MODIFICATIONS
of expansion and duration, the next thing to be considered, is,—HOW THE
MIND COMES BY THEM. As for the idea of finite, there is no great
difficulty. The obvious portions of extension that affect our senses,
carry with them into the mind the idea of finite: and the ordinary
periods of succession, whereby we measure time and duration, as hours,
days, and years, are bounded lengths. The difficulty is, how we come by
those BOUNDLESS IDEAS of eternity and immensity; since the objects we
converse with come so much short of any approach or proportion to that
largeness.

3. How we come by the Idea of Infinity.

Every one that has any idea of any stated lengths of space, as a foot,
finds that he can repeat that idea; and joining it to the former, make
the idea of two feet; and by the addition of a third, three feet; and
so on, without ever coming to an end of his additions, whether of the
same idea of a foot, or, if he pleases, of doubling it, or any other
idea he has of any length, as a mile, or diameter of the earth, or of
the orbis magnus: for whichever of these he takes, and how often soever
he doubles, or any otherwise multiplies it, he finds, that, after he
has continued his doubling in his thoughts, and enlarged his idea as
much as he pleases, he has no more reason to stop, nor is one jot
nearer the end of such addition, than he was at first setting out: the
power of enlarging his idea of space by further additions remaining
still the same, he hence takes the idea of infinite space.

4. Our Idea of Space boundless.

This, I think, is the way whereby the mind gets the IDEA of infinite
space. It is a quite different consideration, to examine whether the
mind has the idea of such a boundless space ACTUALLY EXISTING; since
our ideas are not always proofs of the existence of things: but yet,
since this comes here in our way, I suppose I may say, that we are APT
TO THINK that space in itself is actually boundless, to which
imagination the idea of space or expansion of itself naturally leads
us. For, it being considered by us, either as the extension of body, or
as existing by itself, without any solid matter taking it up, (for of
such a void space we have not only the idea, but I have proved, as I
think, from the motion of body, its necessary existence,) it is
impossible the mind should be ever able to find or suppose any end of
it, or be stopped anywhere in its progress in this space, how far
soever it extends its thoughts. Any bounds made with body, even
adamantine walls, are so far from putting a stop to the mind in its
further progress in space and extension that it rather facilitates and
enlarges it. For so far as that body reaches, so far no one can doubt
of extension; and when we are come to the utmost extremity of body,
what is there that can there put a stop, and satisfy the mind that it
is at the end of space, when it perceives that it is not; nay, when it
is satisfied that body itself can move into it? For, if it be necessary
for the motion of body, that there should be an empty space, though
ever so little, here amongst bodies; and if it be possible for body to
move in or through that empty space;—nay, it is impossible for any
particle of matter to move but into an empty space; the same
possibility of a body’s moving into a void space, beyond the utmost
bounds of body, as well as into a void space interspersed amongst
bodies, will always remain clear and evident: the idea of empty pure
space, whether within or beyond the confines of all bodies, being
exactly the same, differing not in nature, though in bulk; and there
being nothing to hinder body from moving into it. So that wherever the
mind places itself by any thought, either amongst, or remote from all
bodies, it can, in this uniform idea of space, nowhere find any bounds,
any end; and so must necessarily conclude it, by the very nature and
idea of each part of it, to be actually infinite.

5. And so of Duration.

As, by the power we find in ourselves of repeating, as often as we
will, any idea of space, we get the idea of IMMENSITY; so, by being
able to repeat the idea of any length of duration we have in our minds,
with all the endless addition