bad effect on
the State. This, in fact, and not a problem of theology, was what the
Roman senate had to judge.

[7] Marriage, for instance, being a civil contract, has civil effects
without which society cannot even subsist. Suppose a body of clergy
should claim the sole right of permitting this act, a right which every
intolerant religion must of necessity claim, is it not clear that in
establishing the authority of the Church in this respect, it will be
destroying that of the prince, who will have thenceforth only as many
subjects as the clergy choose to allow him? Being in a position to
marry or not to marry people, according to their acceptance of such
and such a doctrine, their admission or rejection of such and such a
formula, their greater or less piety, the Church alone, by the exercise
of prudence and firmness, will dispose of all inheritances, offices
and citizens, and even of the State itself, which could not subsist
if it were composed entirely of bastards? But, I shall be told, there
will be appeals on the ground of abuse, summonses and decrees; the
temporalities will be seized. How sad! The clergy, however little, I
will not say courage, but sense it has, will take no notice and go its
way: it will quietly allow appeals, summonses, decrees and seizures,
and, in the end, will remain the master. It is not, I think, a great
sacrifice to give up a part, when one is sure of securing all.

CHAPTER IX

CONCLUSION

Now that I have laid down the true principles of political right, and
tried to give the State a basis of its own to rest on, I ought next
to strengthen it by its external relations, which would include the
law of nations, commerce, the right of war and conquest, public right,
leagues, negotiations, treaties, etc. But all this forms a new subject
that is far too vast for my narrow scope. I ought throughout to have
kept to a more limited sphere.

A DISCOURSE

WHICH WON THE PRIZE AT THE ACADEMY OF DIJON IN 1750, ON THIS QUESTION
PROPOSED BY THE ACADEMY:

HAS THE RESTORATION OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES HAD A PURIFYING EFFECT
UPON MORALS?

Barbaras his ego sum, qui non intelligor illis.--OVID.[1]

[1] Here I am, a barbarian, because men understand me not.

PREFACE

The following pages contain a discussion of one of the most sublime
and interesting of all moral questions. It is not concerned, however,
with those metaphysical subtleties, which of late have found their way
into every department of literature, and from which even our academic
curricula are not always free. We have now to do with one of those
truths on which the happiness of mankind depends.

I foresee that I shall not readily be forgiven for having taken up the
position I have adopted. Setting myself up against all that is nowadays
most admired, I can expect no less than a universal outcry against me:
nor is the approbation of a few sensible men enough to make me count
on that of the public. But I have taken my stand, and I shall be at no
pains to please either intellectuals or men of the world. There are in
all ages men born to be in bondage to the opinions of the society in
which they live. There are not a few, who to-day play the free-thinker
and the philosopher, who would, if they had lived in the time of the
League, have been no more than fanatics. No author, who has a mind to
outlive his own age, should write for such readers.

A word more and I have done. As I did not expect the honour conferred
on me, I had, since sending in my Discourse, so altered and enlarged
it as almost to make it a new work; but in the circumstances I have
felt bound to publish it just as it was when it received the prize. I
have only added a few notes, and left two alterations which are easily
recognisable, of which the Academy possibly might not have approved.
The respect, gratitude and even justice I owe to that body seemed to me
to demand this acknowledgment.

MORAL EFFECTS

OF THE ARTS AND SCIENCES

_Decipimur specie recti_.--HORACE.

The question before me is, "Whether the Restoration of the arts and
sciences has had the effect of purifying or corrupting morals." Which
side am I to take? That, gentlemen, which becomes an honest man, who is
sensible of his own ignorance, and thinks himself none the worse for it.

I feel the difficulty of treating this subject fittingly, before the
tribunal which is to judge of what I advance. How can I presume to
belittle the sciences before one of the most learned assemblies in
Europe, to commend ignorance in a famous Academy, and reconcile my
contempt for study with the respect due to the truly learned?

I was aware of these inconsistencies, but not discouraged by them. It
is not science, I said to myself, that I am attacking; it is virtue
that I am defending, and that before virtuous men--and goodness is even
dearer to the good than learning to the learned.

What then have I to fear? The sagacity of the assembly before which
I am pleading? That, I acknowledge, is to be feared; but rather on
account of faults of construction than of the views I hold. Just
sovereigns have never hesitated to decide against themselves in
doubtful cases; and indeed the most advantageous situation in which a
just claim can be, is that of being laid before a just and enlightened
arbitrator, who is judge in his own case.

To this motive, which encouraged me, I may add another which finally
decided me. And this is, that as I have upheld the cause of truth to
the best of my natural abilities, whatever my apparent success, there
is one reward which cannot fail me. That reward I shall find in the
bottom of my heart.

THE FIRST PART

It is a noble and beautiful spectacle to see man raising himself, so
to speak, from nothing by his own exertions; dissipating, by the light
of reason, all the thick clouds in which he was by nature enveloped;
mounting above himself; soaring in thought even to the celestial
regions; like the sun, encompassing with giant strides the vast extent
of the universe; and, what is still grander and more wonderful, going
back into himself, there to study man and get to know his own nature,
his duties and his end. All these miracles we have seen renewed within
the last few generations.

Europe had relapsed into the barbarism of the earliest ages; the
inhabitants of this part of the world, which is at present so highly
enlightened, were plunged, some centuries ago, in a state still-worse
than ignorance. A scientific jargon, more despicable than mere
ignorance, had usurped the name of knowledge, and opposed an almost
invincible obstacle to its restoration.

Things had come to such a pass, that it required a complete revolution
to bring men back to common sense. This came at last from the quarter