and misfortunes might not any one
have saved mankind, by pulling up the stakes, or filling up the ditch,
and crying to his fellows, "Beware of listening to this impostor; you
are undone if you once forget that the fruits of the earth, belong to
us all, and the earth itself to nobody." But there is great probability
that things had then already come to such a pitch, that they could no
longer continue as they were; for the idea of property depends on many
prior ideas, which could only be acquired successively, and cannot have
been formed all at once in the human mind.

Mankind must have made very considerable progress, and acquired
considerable knowledge and industry which they must also have
transmitted and increased from age to age, before they arrived at this
last point of the state of nature. Let us then go farther back and
endeavour to unify under a single point of view that slow succession of
events and discoveries in the most natural order.

Man's first feeling was that of his own existence, and his first care
that of self-preservation. The produce of the earth furnished him
with all he needed, and instinct told him how to use it. Hunger and
other appetites made him at various times experience various modes of
existence; and among these was one which urged him to propagate his
species--a blind propensity that, having nothing to do with the heart,
produced a merely animal act. The want once gratified, the two sexes
knew each other no more; and even the offspring was nothing to its
mother, as soon as it could do without her.

Such was the condition of infant man; the life of an animal limited
at first to mere sensations, and hardly profiting by the gifts nature
bestowed on him, much less capable of entertaining a thought of forcing
anything from her. But difficulties soon presented themselves, and
it became necessary to learn how to surmount them: the height of the
trees, which prevented him from gathering their fruits, the competition
of other animals desirous of the same fruits, and the ferocity of those
who needed them for their own preservation, all obliged him to apply
himself to bodily exercises. He had to be active, swift of foot, and
vigorous in light. Natural weapons, stones and sticks, were easily
found: he learnt to surmount the obstacles of nature, to contend in
case of necessity with other animals, and to dispute for the means of
subsistence even with other men, or to indemnify himself for what he
was forced to give up to a stronger.

In proportion as the human race grew more numerous, men's cares
increased. The difference of soils, climates and seasons, must have
introduced some differences into their manner of living. Barren years,
long and sharp winters, scorching summers which parched the fruits of
the earth, must have demanded a new industry. On the sea-shore and the
banks of rivers, they invented the hook and line, and became fishermen
and eaters of fish. In the forests they made bows and arrows, and
became huntsmen and warriors. In cold countries they clothed themselves
with the skins of the beasts they had slain. The lightning, a volcano,
or some lucky chance acquainted them with fire, a new resource against
the rigours of winter: they next learned how to preserve this element,
then how to reproduce it, and finally how to prepare with it the flesh
of animals which before they had eaten raw.

This repeated relevance of various beings to himself, and one to
another, would naturally give rise in the human mind to the perceptions
of certain relations between them. Thus the relations which we denote
by the terms, great, small, strong, weak, swift, slow, fearful, bold,
and the like, almost insensibly compared at need, must have at length
produced in him a kind of reflection, or rather a mechanical prudence,
which would indicate to him the precautions most necessary to his
security.

The new intelligence which resulted from this development increased his
superiority over other animals, by making him sensible of it. He would
now endeavour, therefore, to ensnare them, would play them a thousand
tricks, and though many of them might surpass him in swiftness or in
strength, would in time become the master of some and the scourge of
others. Thus, the first time he looked into himself, he felt the first
emotion of pride; and, at a time when he scarce knew how to distinguish
the different orders of beings, by looking upon his species as of the
highest order, he prepared the way for assuming pre-eminence as an
individual.

Other men, it is true, were not then to him what they now are to us,
and he had no greater intercourse with them than with other animals;
yet they were not neglected in his observations. The conformities,
which he would in time discover between them, and between himself and
his female, led him to judge of others which were not then perceptible;
and finding that they all behaved as he himself would have done in like
circumstances, he naturally inferred that their manner of thinking
and acting was altogether in conformity with his own. This important
truth, once deeply impressed on his mind, must have induced him, from
an intuitive feeling more certain and much more rapid than any kind of
reasoning, to pursue the rules of conduct, which he had best observe
towards them, for his own security and advantage.

Taught by experience that the love of well-being is the sole motive of
human actions, he found himself in a position to distinguish the few
cases, in which mutual interest might justify him in relying upon the
assistance of his fellows; and also the still fewer cases in which a
conflict of interests might give cause to suspect them. In the former
case, he joined in the same herd with them, or at most in some kind of
loose association, that laid no restraint on its members, and lasted no
longer than the transitory occasion that formed it. In the latter case,
every one sought his own private advantage, either by open force, if he
thought himself strong enough, or by address and cunning, if he felt
himself the weaker.

In this manner, men may have insensibly acquired some gross ideas of
mutual undertakings, and of the advantages of fulfilling them: that
is, just so far as their present and apparent interest was concerned:
for they were perfect strangers to foresight, and were so far from
troubling themselves about the distant future, that they hardly thought
of the morrow. If a deer was to be taken, every one saw that, in
order to succeed, he must abide faithfully by his post: but if a hare
happened to come within the reach of any one of them, it is not to be
doubted that he pursued it without scruple, and, having seized his
prey, cared very little, if by so doing he caused his companions to
miss theirs.

It is easy to understand that such intercourse would not require a
language much more refined than that of rooks or monkeys, who